---
title: Essay 2
layout: about
permalink: /essay-02.html
---

# Isolationsism, Expansionsim, and American Interests Abroad 

## Background

The 20th century in the United States was defined by numerous foreign conflicts and wars with other countries that resulted in various long-term political, economic, and cultural ramifications that have shaped international relations today. These wars and foreign conflicts can be traced back to a constant deviation throughout the 20th century where the major political parties, the US President, and the American public deviated between an isolationist attitude toward US foreign affairs and an expansionist attitude. It’s important to note that since its inception, the United States has never practiced geographical, economic, and political isolationism in its purest form.[^1]  A better way of describing isolationism in the American context is unilateralism or non-interventionism.[^2] This paper seeks to focus on the attitude shifts of the players that directly impacted US foreign policy decisions, such as the President, the Congress, and the American public that elected them. 

## Introduction 

Nevertheless, the attitude amongst the American political apparatus in the 20th century was heavily influenced by propaganda, industry, ideology, foreign threats, and a direct confrontation with the realities of previous interventions. One common thread interwoven in each of the factors is a deeply held belief in American exceptionalism, the idea that America is a prosperous, benevolent democratic nation that can bring peace and stability abroad. Another common thread is the competition of private industry in the American capitalist society. Nonetheless, in the 20th century expansionism dominated the US approach of American foreign policy primarily due to an evolving belief in American exceptionalism and a beleif in the superior interests of the United States. 


{% include feature/pdf.html filename="THE_DEBATE_OVER_IMPERIALISM_IN.pdf" caption="This gives great insight into the long debate over imperialism in the United States! " %}


## The 19th Cenutry 

Americans have always held a deep belief that the American democratic experience is exceptional and has the power to change the world. Despite this belief, early Americans were very weary of foreign entanglements and sought to keep the American sphere of influence in the North American continent all the way up the end of the 19th century. This isolationist attitude was echoed in George Washington’s 1796 farewell address where he stated, “The great rule of conduct for us in regard to foreign nations is in extending our commercial relations, to have with them as little political connection as possible.”[^3]  James Monroe would reassert this attitude in his 7th annual address to congress, which would be known as the “Monroe Doctrine.” This warned European powers that any interference with matters in the western hemisphere or any attempt to colonize in the west would not be tolerated by the United States.[^4] This continued the course of isolationism throughout the 19th century. In fact, prior to the 1998 Spanish-American war, the American empire only expanded to a sizeable chunk of Mexico after the Mexican-American War from 1846-1848, and to Alaska, after its purchase from Russia in 1867. Domestic development was the focus in America during most of the 19th century.[^5]  Nonetheless, the United States held a mostly non-interventionist attitude for most of the 19th century. 

## Manifest Destiny Abroad 

The United States had a complete attitude shift in 1898 with the involvement of the US in the Spanish-American war and the subsequent age of imperialism. This was influenced by many factors, with the first one being a traditional, general dislike for authoritarianism amongst Americans, who were angered by Spain’s repression of the Cubans. The second factor being the newspaper propaganda tactics employed at the end of the 19th century. During the 19th century, the development of the telegraph, railroads, and public schools fundamentally transformed American society. This allowed for a much quicker exchange of information, which brought together ideas and ideals from different parts of the nation. This led to a growing national conscience at the end of the 19th century, which then led to the transformation of the newspaper. Newspaper companies began embracing broader and richer ideologies than previous generations. To maintain interest and compete with rivals, many correspondents overexaggerated events and invented conditions in their reports [^6] This plays right into the third factor, which was an idea that was embraced by many towards the end of the 19th century, the national sentiment that the new US frontier should be expanded abroad. This was of course rooted in the idea of manifest ioritry 
The Spanish American War resulted in the US acquiring the Philippines, Guam, Puerto Rico, part of Samoa, and control over the Cuban government.The US also annexed Hawaii in 1898. Despite the change in attitude towards imperialism and America colonialism, most of the enthusiasm for expansionism amongst the American public died down following the end of the war in 1898.[^7] The beginning of the 20th century brought the topic of “imperialism” into the mainstream political discourse. The Democratic platform of 1900 accused the Republican party of supporting colonialism, but the re-election of McKinley in 1900 showed that while there may have not been as much enthusiasm for the policy, Americans were generally fine with the US expansion of power.[^8] This was also reflected with the subsequent election of Theodore Roosevelt and William Howard Taft. Roosevelt would add a corollary to the Monroe doctrine asserting that the US has the right to interfere in matters in the western hemisphere. Taft would go on and codify the policy of “Dollar Diplomacy,” a form of economic expansionism in Latin America. Theodore Roosevelt’s “A Strenuous life” speech given in 1899 while serving as Vice-President exemplifies the viewpoint that dominated the American public and which served as the ideological foundation for the expansionists call for US domination:
We cannot sit huddled within our own borders and avow ourselves merely an assemblage of well-to-do hucksters who care nothing for what happens beyond. Such a policy would defeat even its own end; for as the nation’s grow to have ever wider and wider interests, and are brought into closer and closer contact, if we are to hold our own in the struggle for naval and commercial supremacy, we must build up our power without our own borders. We must build the isthmian canal, and we must grasp the points of vantage which will enable us to have our say in deciding the destiny of the oceans of the East and the West… The Philippines offer a yet graver problem. Their population includes half-caste and native Christians, warlike Moslems, and wild pagans. Many of their people are utterly unfit for self-government and show no signs of becoming fit. Others may in time become fit but at present can only take part in self-government under a wise supervision, at once firm and beneficent.[^9]  
Roosevelt’s speech not only reflects the new idea of expanding the American frontier abroad which was articulated in Frederick Jackson Turner’s speech, but also reflects another belief regarding the inferiority of the Philippine race due to their inability to self-govern. This not only reflects the continued belief in American exceptionalism but a belief in the inferiority of other races. Nonetheless, this was the rationale for the American territorial expansion and economic expansion of late 19th and early 20th century.

## World War 1 

World War 1 would break out in Europe in 1914, triggering international chaos and tension. Prior to the US involvement in World War 1, President Woodrow Wilson asserted that the US would prioritize neutrality: “The people of this country count on me to keep them out of the war. It would be a calamity to the world at large if we should be actively drawn into a conflict and so deprived of all disinterested influence over that settlement.”[^10]  It seems reasonable to assume from Wilson’s comment that a vast majority of the US drew the line when it came to engaging in a large-scale military conflict like the Great War, especially since there was no direct reason for US involvement and the US had nothing to gain economically. This no doubt explains why the anti-war movement in 1914 held the popular view about the Great War, was made up of prominent business men, upper-class intellectuals, and establishment progressive politicians.[^11]  However, the sentiment for neutrality would take a sharp turn due to release of the Zimmerman telegram which would spark national unity around US involvement. “We shall endeavor to inspire this to keep the United States of America neutral. In the event of this not succeeding––we make Mexico a proposal of alliance on the following basis: make war together, make peace together.”[^12]  This direct threat towards America was enough to mobilize the population to support war. Although the anti-war movement was vocal, a vast majority of Americans supported intervention in response to the Zimmerman telegram.[^13] In his declaration speech, Woodrow Wilson would make the case for intervention not just because the US was threatened, but because the US has to play a much larger role on the international stage to ensure peace: 
A steadfast concert for peace can never be maintained except by a partnership of democratic nations. No autocratic government could be trusted to keep faith within it or observe its covenants. It must be a league of honor, a partnership of opinion… It is a fearful thing to lead this great peaceful people into war, into the most terrible and disastrous of all wars, civilization itself seeming to be in the balance. But the right is more precious than peace, and we shall fight for the things which we have always carried nearest our hearts,-for democracy, for the right of those who submit to authority to have a voice in their own Governments, for the rights and liberties of small nations, for a universal dominion of right by such a concert of free peoples as shall bring peace and safety to all nations and make the world itself at last free.[^14] 
Wilson is not only making the case for intervention, but he’s espousing a new international order to ensure peace and is renewing the call for the United States to expand its interests abroad, to also ensure tranquility everywhere. Nonetheless, most of the American people embraced an isolationist spirit during the outbreak of World War, which was changed after the veiled threat in the Zimmerman’s telegram. Woodrow Wilson would not only urge for US intervention but also call for the spread of American Democracy abroad, which can be seen as a renewal of the idea of American exceptionalism. Nevertheless, this renewal would have long lasting influence over US foreign policy decisions. 

## The League of Nations 


The end of World War 1 shed light to a new desire amongst many powers to establish an international order for peace. Woodrow Wilson proposed this idea in his famous 14-points speech, known as the League of Nations. Despite his proposal, the US would end up rejecting the League of Nations and never join. This rejection can be attributed to three reasons. First, while the United States had spent the last 17 years embracing imperialism and economic expansion, the League of Nations called for multilateralism, which would demand the United States conform to objectives and rules. The League of Nations would have required the United States to defend any nation in the league that was attacked.[^15]  Senator Henry Cabot Lodge lead the Republicans in the Senate in opposing Wilson’s proposed League and calling for reservations that would have given the United States special privileges in the League: 
 The United States assumes no obligation to preserve the territorial integrity or political independence of any other country or to interfere in controversies between nations -- whether members of the League or not…The United States shall not be obligated to contribute to any expenses of the League of Nations.[^16]  
 
The Lodge Reservations reflect a particular sentiment amongst many leaders in the United States. While the past 17 years involved imperialism and economic expansionism abroad, the Lodge Reservations and the Senate’s subsequent rejection of the League of Nations exemplifies a more desire for the United States to act soul independently when approaching foreign policy. Woodrow Wilson may have wanted an international order to establish peace, but the US Senate made it very clear that the interests of the United States abroad was going to be prioritized over multilateralism and international institutions. This would be considered a more “nativist” or “American First” approach, seems to be in congruence with the policies embraced by the United States over the past 17 years. 

## World War 2 and the UN  
	
  The United States would enter its most extreme period of isolationism from 1929 all the way till 1941. This was due to its primary concern with domestic conditions resulting from the Great Depression, which wiped out the American economy and sent an economic shockwave across the rest of the world. As a new European continent emerged, the US was faced with some hard decisions. As Hitler and his Nazi regime invaded Poland, after already conquering Czechoslovakia and Austria, war erupted in Europe once again. Reflecting on the casualties and destruction from World War 1, the United States would declare itself neutral. Despite this stance of neutrality, FDR would drastically work to build up the US military and would provide economic aid to European allies. FDR knew that war with the rogue dictator of Germany was inevitable. The US was pulled into World War 2 due to the attack on Pearl Harbor. Despite an  vocal anti-war movement amongst the American people, a vast majority of Americans knew that the future of the world was at stake. Prior to Nazi Germany’s defeat, Franklin Delanar Roosevelt began working with the allied powers in establishing the foundations of a new international order. When establishing the United Nations, President Roosevelt recognized the weaknesses of the League of Nations, and sought to establish a post-war order to maintain peace of the world, with the United States receiving a position that drove a lot of the decisions made by this organization. This not only reflects the belief in American exceptionalism, but also the belief in American independence and superiority—even in an international alliance, the United States should be granted a level of seniority in the decision making, thus allowing the United States to advance its own interests while also working internationally to ensure peace.[^17]
  
## The Cold War and Communism  
	
  For the rest of the 20th century, the United States would maintain its status as the global superpower in the world. The WW2 victory renewed the spirit of American exceptionalism amongst the people and the leadership, and the United States played the biggest role in shaping the international relations of the post-war era. From WW2 and beyond, the United States would abandon isolationism in all respects. The US was pulled into various military conflicts and entanglements including the Korean War, the Cuban Missile Crisis, the Vietnam War, the Iranian Hostage Crisis, the Iran/Iraq War, the Iran-Contra Affair. The US government wielded significant military power as  the US congress’ role in approving military affairs vanished. This expansionist and interventionist attitude can be attributed to multiple factors. The first on being the anti-communist fervor that plagued the post-World War 2 era and drove American foreign policy. This plays into the second factor, which was a major right-wing shift in the American populace during the second half the 20th century. While Anti-communist propaganda played a major role in this shift, the urban riots during the civil rights era played a major role in pushing more Americans to the right. Violence and chaos generated a national backlash, which prompted Americans to vote for conservatives, who were often the big proponents of the anti-communist approach to foreign policy and military build-up. Nonetheless, expansionism would dominate the United States for the rest of the century, primarily due to Cold War hysteria and a conservative shift in the American populace due to the turbulence and chaos form 60’s and 70’s.[^18] 
  
# Conclusion 
	
  The United States was founded on the ideals of liberty, individualism, and unalienable rights––ideals that were considered radical for that time. From the very beginning of the republic, American public had always held a sense that the democratic experience in America is unique and extraordinary. The period following the establishment of the republic saw the early settlers embracing manifest destiny–that it was a God give right for the US to expand westward. The countries early founding fathers suggested that America stay true to isolationism and avoid foreign conflicts, which was the general attitude of the United States for most of the 19th century. By the end of the 19th century however, a growing national conscience sparked by capitalist developments and the evolution of the newspaper began to embrace a new idea: That the new American frontier would be beyond US borders. These factors culminated into the US’s involvement into the Spanish American war and the subsequent territorial expansion. McKinley, Roosevelt, and Taft would continue to embrace the expansionist ideas in the age of imperialism, all believing in the superiority of the American experiment US interests. Originally, the US embraced an isolationist approach to the first World War but was nevertheless pulled after the threat in the Zimmerman’s telegram was released. While Wilson made the call for a international order and the spread of Democracy, a republican congress that believed in America’s independent and interest oriented approach to foreign policy rejected the international order. The United States would emerge from World War II as the global military superpower, with FDR successfully establishing America’s place as a leading member of the UN. During the second half of the 20th century, the original belief in the exceptionalism of America had evolved into the conviction that America had a role in preventing the spread of communism throughout the free world, leading the US into multiple indirect foreign conflicts that had long-term implications. Chaos on the domestic front resulting from civil rights tension would drive the nation to the right-wing, ultimately securing expansionism’s place in the American story for the rest of the century. Nevertheless, American expansionism would be the dominate attitude for most of the 20th century, primarily grounded in a belief in the necessity to expand the American experiment throughout the world.

[^1]: Fensterwald, Bernard.“The Anatomy of American ‘Isolationism’ and Expansionism. Part I.” The Journal of Conflict Resolution 2, no. 2 (1958): 1-2. http://www.jstor.org/stable/172971. 

[^2]: Ltd, All Answers. “Why Did the United States Refuse to Join the League of Nations?” UK Essays. UK Essays, December 31, 2021. https://www.ukessays.com/essays/history/united-states-league-of-nations-8982.php#_ftnref9. 

[^3]: Charles A. Kupchan, “Isolationism Is Not a Dirty Word,” The Atlantic (Atlantic Media Company, September 28, 2020), https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/09/virtue-isolationism/616499/ 

[^4]: Dole, Charles F. “The Right and Wrong of the Monroe Doctrine.” The Atlantic. Atlantic Media Company, June 19, 2017. https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1905/04/the-right-and-wrong-of-the-monroe-doctrine/530856/. 

[^5]: Kupchan, Charles A. “Isolationism Is Not a Dirty Word.” The Atlantic. Atlantic Media Company, September 28, 2020. https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/09/virtue-isolationism/616499/. 

[^6]: Castillo , Elisha  Jospeh. “Public Opinion a Cause for Spanish American War .” CiteSeerX , 1932. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.996.2800&amp;rep=rep1&amp;type=pdf.  

[^7]: Fensterwald, Bernard. "The Anatomy of American 'Isolationsim' and 'Expansionism.' Part I. 

[^8]: “1900 Democratic Party Platform.” 1900 Democratic Party Platform | The American Presidency Project, July 5, 1900. https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/1900-democratic-party-platform. 

[^9]: Roosevelt , Theodore. “Roosevelt, ‘Strenuous Life, 1899," Speech Text.” Voices of Democracy, July 5, 2016. https://voicesofdemocracy.umd.edu/roosevelt-strenuous-life-1899-speech-text/. 

[^10]: Charles Seymour, "American Neutrality," Foreign Affairs 14, no. 1 (October 1935): 26-36\

[^11]: “Reds, Labor, and the Great War: Antiwar Activism in the Pacific Northwest.” World War I antiwar movement. Accessed May 11, 2022. https://depts.washington.edu/antiwar/WW1_reds.shtml 

[^12]: “Zimmerman Translation .” Zimmerman Telegram . National Archives . Accessed March 11, 2022. https://www.archives.gov/files/education/images/zimmermanntranslation.jpg#.Yi2hQ0UQY7o.link

[^13]: "Reds, Labor, and the Great War." 

[^14]: “Joint Address to Congress Leading to a Declaration of War against Germany (1917).” National Archives and Records Administration. National Archives and Records Administration. Accessed May 11, 2022. https://www.archives.gov/milestone-documents/address-to-congress-declaration-of-war-against-germany. 

[^15]: Ltd, All Answers. “Why Did the United States Refuse to Join the League of Nations?” UK Essays. UK Essays, December 31, 2021. https://www.ukessays.com/essays/history/united-states-league-of-nations-8982.php#_ftnref9 

[^16]: Lodge , Henry. “Senate Debate on the League of Nations .” Digital history. Accessed May 11, 2022. https://www.digitalhistory.uh.edu/disp_textbook.cfm?smtID=3&amp;psid=3909. 

[^17]: “The United States and the Founding of the United Nations .” U.S. Department of State. U.S. Department of State. Accessed May 11, 2022. https://2001-2009.state.gov/r/pa/ho/pubs/fs/55407.htm. 

[^18]: Chait, Jonathan. “New Study Shows Riots Make America Conservative.” Intelligencer, May 21, 2015. https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2015/05/new-study-shows-riots-make-america-conservative.html.  




## Notes

