---
title: essay 1 
layout: about 
permalink: /essay-01.html
---

# An Analaysis of the Rise and Fall of Imperialism and Isolationsim in 20th Century United States




---

## Introduction
One debate that has dominated the political discourse over the past two decades is whether the United States should serve as an isolationist country or an expansionist empire. Since the very unpopular Global War on Terror that began after the 9/11 attacks on the World Trade Center, the question regarding America’s role on the global stage has re-emerged. **Isolationism** refers to the process of avoiding political or economic conflicts with other countries, while **expansionism** would be considered the opposite. From the American perspective, expansionism is often justified through the idea of American exceptionalism, the idea that America is the benevolent superpower of the world and tasked with spreading Democracy. Nevertheless, while it may seem to the average citizen that this rampant debate between these two stances was something that has recently emerged, this debate has been ongoing in America since the republic's establishment. In his farewell address, George Washington urges the need for America to avoid foreign entanglements. Despite this, centuries of war and conflict have shown that American leaders and the American public have not always decided to embody what Washington was urging. American history is defined by a long consistent deviation between the two foreign policy stances by the federal government, with public opinion also deviating between the two. This project seeks to examine the root causes of this deviation, by focusing on the specific periods in the 20th-century.

## Background 
The 20th century in the United States was defined by numerous foreign conflicts with other countries. On the other hand, the 19th century was a stark contrast to this. It’s important to note that since its inception, the United States has never practiced geographical, economic, and political isolationism in its purest form but rather a form of pseudo-isolationism that was centered around the U.S.’s involvement in European affairs. The United States has always been somewhat an expansionist nation since the nation’s inception, which certain periods swinging more towards expansionism and others toward isolationism. How involved the United States was in European affairs seems to be the big indicator of which path the U.S. is choosing to take. This idea of “pseudo-isolationism” was embraced by the U.S. in the late 19th century.[^1] However, at the turn of the 20th century in 1898, the Spanish American War broke out changing the course for American foreign policy for the next century. This ushered in a new era of American Imperialism with the U.S. acquiring a myriad of new territories. Before World War 1, the U.S. decided to remain neutral until a threat from Germany drew the U.S. into the Great War. This ended with the US rejecting the treaty of Versailles and not joining the League of Nations indicating another attitude shift. The U.S. primarily remained “isolationist” after World War 1 to address domestic issues like the Great Depression. *Nevertheless, the attitude shifts on American foreign policy in 20th century were heavily influenced by propaganda, industry, foreign threats, and the aftermaths of violent conflicts.*

## From Isolationsim to Expansionism 
James Monroe’s seventh annual address to Congress would lay the foundations for what American isolationism would mean in the 19th century: 

In the discussions to which this interest has given rise, and in the arrangements by which they may terminate, the occasion has been judged proper for asserting, as a principle in which the rights and interests of the United States are involved, that the American continents, by free and independent condition which they have assumed and maintain, are henceforth not to be considered as subjects for future colonization by any European Power.[^2]

This assertion would become known as the Monroe Doctrine and he would declare that Europe is to not attempt colonization over any country in the Western Hemisphere. This would lay the foundation for the most of American foreign policy in the 19th century. In fact, in the second half of the 19th century leading up to the Spanish-American War, the only policy that pointed towards more expansionism was the purchase of Alaska in 1867. Nevertheless, before the Spanish-American War, a vast majority of the public opposed expansionism and imperialism. This of course took a change during the events leading up to congress declaring war on Spain in 1898.[^3] As the USS Main exploded, opportunistic editorials took advantage of the situation to immediately place the blame on Spain, ignoring all the facts of the situation.  Newspaper issues from people like William Randolph Hearst and Joseph Pulitzer exploited the crisis to increase the circulation of their respective newspapers. Here’s a prime example of the propaganda that deliberately over-sensationalized the explosion of the USS Main: 

https://github.com/mortonjohn71/ushistorypt2link/blob/main/pages/Screen%20Shot%202022-03-13%20at%2012.56.54%20AM.png[^4]



Newspapers also emphasized the United States’ economic interests within that region, with the Cuban Civil War causing a cut in trade with the US by $100 million. It’s important to note that industry also played a major role in US involvement. Sending US troops into Cuba was financially expedient for investors looking to expand industry into new territory, and this no doubt influenced President McKinley and the Republican members of congress that led the pro-interventionist movement in congress.[^5] In the end, a combination of media propaganda and pressure from industries looking to advance their financial interests is what ultimately tilted the scale of US foreign policy towards a pro-interventionist stance, that turned the US from a somewhat isolationist nation to an expansionist nation in the Western Hemisphere near the end of the 19th century. 

## The Age of Imperialism and WW1 
The US involvement in the Spanish-American War triggered a new era of American imperialism in the western hemisphere. The Treaty of Paris in 1848 resulted in Spain ceding the Philippines to the US for $20 million, acquiring Puerto Rico, part of Samoa, and Guam, and extending guardianship for the Cuban government. The United States also annexed Hawaii in June of 1898. This massive expansion of US power was a direct result of commercial interests, which sought to expand their industries into new territories teeming with valuable resources.[^6] Despite this, the passion of the American public to support expansionism died down after the Treaty of Paris was approved by the Senate. Even with an apathetic public, the US government continued its rampant policy of expansionism. The Anti-Imperialist league would be established in 1900 to oppose US control over the Philippines. Although defeated by US public opinion who generally approved of imperialism, they were a vocal group. Their viewpoints are best represented in this political cartoon released in 1899: 
https://github.com/mortonjohn71/ushistorypt2link/blob/main/pages/Screen%20Shot%202022-03-13%20at%2012.57.22%20AM.png[^7]


Notice how, the blackboard in the background reads “The consent of the governed is a good thing in theory, but very rare in fact…the U.S. must govern its new territories with or without their consent until they can govern themselves.” Amid World War 1 breaking out in Europe, President Woodrow Wilson asserted that he would prioritize two things: the United States’ preservation of its neutral rights and world peace: “The people of this country count on me to keep them out of the war. It would be a calamity to the world at large if we should be actively drawn into a conflict and so deprived of all disinterested influence over that settlement.”[^8] Wilson adopted a strict policy of isolationism for the country during the war, which helped him win the 1916 Presidential Election with his slogan: “He Kept Us Out of War.” As Germany unleashed submarine warfare, from 1916-1917, the United States was deeply divided about where it stood concerning the war. Socialists and Progressives made up the pacifists division, democrats and republicans generally supported only going to war if threatened, interventionalists were made up on anglophile Northeast Republicans and were led by Theodore Roosevelt, who urged Wilson to enter the war and instate a draft. In April of 1917, US bankers loaned the allies $2.3 billion to help finance their wartime efforts. As the sinking of British ships alarmed and angered many Americans that Germany’s belligerency could be hurting the American economy, war talks began in Washington[^9] Then, in April of 1917 the release of a telegram by Germany threatening the United States would spark national unity behind US intervention: 

We are intent to begin on the first of February unrestricted submarine warfare. We shall endeavor to inspire this to keep the United States of America neutral. In the event of this not succeeding––we make Mexico a proposal of alliance on the following basis: make war together, make peace together, generous financial support, and an understanding on our part that Mexico is to reconquer the lost territory in Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona.[^10]

The line “make war together” was seen as a direct threat towards the United States. Nevertheless, aggression from Germany and it’s threat to U.S. economic interests would unite the United States around invading in the Great War. 


### End of WW1 Isolationsim 
Near the end of the Great War, Woodrow Wilson called for a new international order to ensure international peace. This would be known as the League of Nations, espoused in his 14 points speech. The war concluded with an allied victory win and the death of 120,000 American troops. At this point, the Great War has scarred the American consciousness and the vast majority of the public believed in an international world order to ensure peace. At the Versailles Peace Conference, the Treaty of Versailles was proposed, and the United States would be tasked with deciding whether to join the rest of the world in accepting it. On September 3, 1919, Wilson set out on a 22 day, 8000-mile train trip around the US to support the League of Nations. Amongst the public, the treaty was very popular, but amongst senators, it was a completely different story. In the previous congressional elections, the Republican party picked up the majority in the US Senate and refused to ratify the Treaty because they believed in limiting the United States sovereignty and restricted their military ability. Nevertheless, the United States would end up not joining the League of Nations and move to focus on domestic issues, thus moving into a new period of isolationism. This would be caused by the costs of World War 1, I and the worry of Senate Republicans over the ability for the United States to continue yielding its expansionist powers.[^11] 
## Conclusion 
At the turn of the 19th century, the United States would make one of its biggest foreign policy shifts that would go on and define American foreign policy for the 20th century. Sensationalized propaganda and the interests of industry would pull the United States into the Spanish-American war, with that war ushering in the age of imperialism for the United States. The US would remain focused on expansionism until the turn of its involvement in World War 1, where a direct threat to US interests would draw the US into the European conflict overseas. Due to the heavy costs of the Great War, the US would then enter a new period of isolationism and emphasized dealing with domestic problems. Nevertheless, this stance would remain until the emergence of a new conflict in Europe that would change the world order for the rest of history.  






## Notes
[^1]: Fensterwald, Bernard. “The Anatomy of American ‘Isolationism’ and Expansionism. Part I.” The Journal of Conflict Resolution 2, no. 2 (1958): 1-2. http://www.jstor.org/stable/172971.
[^2]: “The Monroe Doctrine .” A century of lawmaking for a new nation: U.S. congressional documents and debates, 1774 - 1875. Library of Congress . Accessed March 12, 2022. https://memory.loc.gov/cgi-bin/ampage?collId=llac&fileName=041%2Fllac041.db&recNum=4.
[^3]: Fenstewald, “The Anatomy of American Isolationsim and Expansionism, 4-8. 
[^4]: The World 1889 Issue . July 2012. Photograph. Wikimedia Commons.
[^5]: Gilmore, Glenda Elizabeth, and Thomas J. Sugrue. These United States: A Nation in the Making. W.W. Norton & Company, no. 1 2016, 44-46
[^6]: Gilmore and Surge, These United States, 50-55 
[^7]: Uncle Sam Teaching the World .” Cartoon. Lumen Learning , n.d. 
[^8]: Charles Seymour, "American Neutrality," Foreign Affairs 14, no. 1 (October 1935): 26-36\
[^9]: Gilmore and Surge, These United States, 107-112
[^10]: “Zimmerman Translation .” Zimmerman Telegram . National Archives . Accessed March 11, 2022. https://www.archives.gov/files/education/images/zimmermanntranslation.jpg#.Yi2hQ0UQY7o.link
[^11]: Gilmore and Surge, These United States, 112-119
